Untitled \- November 24, 2025

00:00:00 Pixa After Dark: Okay. We're going to take a look at the forty seven guiding questions. First set are about your relationship with your avatar. Question one why do you do what you do? Um, I do what I do because, uh, as long as I can remember, I've been frustrated by what I see as the gap between my potential and, uh, what I've actually accomplished in life. I feel a lot of times I wasn't able to pursue things that I felt like I could accomplish. Um, well, I mean, I knew I could accomplish because ultimately there was a fear of, uh, sustainability. Not in terms of the ability to continue the work. Um, but really. Well, yeah, ultimately, I'm going to say it's the ability to continue the work due to, uh, really loss of focus. And usually it was loss of focus, Um, due to a loss of interest or, uh, shuffling of priorities or, uh, overwhelm due to some, some other things coming up that. I don't know, a lot of times, um, it felt like I got in the way of my own life because I didn't trust myself to, um, either have the impulse control to not do something on the back end or, um, to steer, steer the course or to keep things mattering to me. And as I got older and studied psych more and came to realize that the degree to which we can change certain aspects of ourselves, that we don't necessarily like, that we're not stuck with them. I felt it was important to, um, help people get out of those loops, get out of the, um, self, um, punishing self sabotage, self criticism and just, um, become a whole and unified person. Question two is what about your market struggles? Breaks your heart that the science is there, but I see it, uh, discussed so rarely, I find that to be, um, not just frustrating, uh, sad, infuriating. Depends. Makes me it makes me angry to see a lot of old practices being used. And as a result, uh, people feeling as if there's no hope. And, um, often, especially with the way our systems are set up, often people don't even get access to the old practices, uh, the outdated practices. And when they finally do, they're so happy to get them that when they don't work, when the old practices don't work, they see themselves as defective. Instead of realizing that these, um, evidence based approaches, um, they work to a certain extent, but there's more effective ways that could work faster, less expensive, and less, um, less needing deep expertise out in some ivory tower. What reality do you see for them that they don't see for themselves? Um, well, often I can see the gifts that, uh, my clients have and how life could be for them if they were able to see, um, themselves without, um, the noise. I often it's not so much as an an improvement in performance as an ease in performance, the ability to do the things that they do with less. Less pushing themselves and just letting themselves ease into it and to trust their often their character or their spirit or their sense of connectedness to purpose, to rise above the, um, the story that they've bound themselves to, that they, they, um, either label themselves as lazy or complacent or distractible. I also see a reality for my clients where they're tapped into the gifts that they remember having earlier in life. Um, their creativity, sense of humor, um, ability to have fun. Ability to, like, feel intellectually curious or to wonder about things, or to be able to enjoy the things that they're doing without feeling as if there's so much more coming. And, you know, even a chance to have challenge, a challenge as something that they could actually have a chance against. What was your biggest failure as a coach educator, program creator? How do you feel that you let the market down, and what did you learn from that experience? My biggest failure was not communicating my message effectively enough earlier. Uh, I think I let the market and myself down because there were various times when, um, you know, I would end up in a downward spiral of emotion because business was going badly and because I was in a downward spiral of downward spiral of emotion. It was challenging to be out there helping, um, other people do better. You know, I think I have to have a certain amount of faith in my ability to be present and tune in, which is challenging to do when, um, you know, my inner monologue is going apeshit. So I think my biggest failure was, um. Really? The times where. Where I was not, uh, putting myself out there and would see people, you know, colleagues, friends who needed what I had to offer. But I didn't feel, uh, ready enough. You know, the perfectionist in me, didn't think I was the person to help them. And I think earlier in, in, in this journey about it's been about ten or fifteen years now. I remember um, I think they used to call it Commission breath where I didn't really know how to, um, promote and sell myself so often. I think I felt disingenuous and it came across and that was a lot of missed opportunities to have relationships with, with people that could have evolved into, um, me contributing to their, um, to their situations and helping them out. What vows did you make from that moment? I, um, I committed to, um. How part of it was listening more realizing like that, I needed to make it. Not about my ability to, You know, whether it's hypnosis or therapy or psych or just that. That wasn't it. The point was, uh, the ability to be present, be still and be quiet and be receptive so that a person could hear themselves, see themselves reflected and, um. And begin to find their own answers to the problem with as long as I can hold space without imposing my values or, you know, and at the same time being a human companion on their journey, what's the most gratifying, fulfilling experience you've had as a coach, educator, program creator? It's always the same. The, um, most gratifying experience is when someone comes in and they have something that they don't think they'll be able to accomplish because of, um, they've tried so many other things in the past, and it hasn't worked, and those things haven't worked. And when they've tried so many things in the past and those things haven't worked. And when I hear them kind of handing me the keys to the puzzle, the secret to the puzzle, um, and, and I get an idea of what would probably work. Uh, what? I would be willing to bet on working. And, um. It's always, um, about two weeks in or about a week and a half in when, um, when they start to realize that they're doing something silly or simple and that that silly, simple thing that's easy to do is having, like, a shocking amount of, um, a disproportionate amount of, uh, leverage in other things. And then they realize that they've tipped their first domino to me. That's that's, um, that's. That's my favorite thing. I can't say anything else about it. It's it's that feeling when they come back and they're like, hey, I noticed something funny. And they start explaining it. And as they're kind of giving it focused attention, They realize that what's what's taking place. Best example of I can think of is that I have a client who came to me initially, um. About weight loss. And as we discussed it, you know, he mentioned various things that had the potential to be the, the lever. And as we spoke and, you know, I introduced different suggestions because I went with a more hypnotic approach, um, because hypnosis is super powerful for weight loss. But, um, so we spoke and then he afterwards was in the session. He was like, well, I don't even know if I've been hypnotized. I said, well, um, you know, it might work and you won't even know then either. You won't know then either. And, um, he chuckled. And then one of my favorite things that people say, he said, he's like, I don't know if I've the hypnosis is working or I'm imagining it. And so I asked him. I said, so really, what's the difference? Uh, right. Um, you know, and I won't explain that there is no difference. ET cetera. ET cetera. And why? But ultimately, that was something that I let let him think about. And, um, you know, twenty to twenty five pounds later, lighter later, he, um, he was laughing because the thing that he noticed was that his attention was, um, was shifting, and that with the shift of attention came a shift in preferences. Um, came a flexibility, a newfound confidence, and a shift in his entire system and the way he felt about things. And all of these things were came together as a constellation to let him make the changes that he needed, not just in his, um, in his eating and relationship with food patterns, but other things around it that more subtly were kind of woven into their this like relational and emotional things. What have you learned from your market? How have they inspired you? Oh, um, last part was what have you sacrificed or given up in the name of the mission? I think with the traditional, um, psych practice, psychiatry practice. Uh, I think I saw the salaries were in the four hundred thousands. And I see my friends, you know, getting to do a lot of things because they're they're comfortably they're well paid. Um, and my, my life, my road is more like an entrepreneur road, more of a roller coaster, um, where I do get to do what I want, and. You know, I'm running my own company, and and that's cool. I mean, that's something I always dreamed of, but at the same. And I. And I don't work for nobody or answer anybody. But at the same time, I feel like, um, a lot of stuff I had to force to learn really fast, including business management, to the extent that I've learned it. Um, a lot of that stuff, um, they get wore on me. Um, you know, I think there are a lot of times when the business consumed time that should have gone to my kids, honestly. What have you learned from your market? I've learned, um, the the phenomenal ability for humans to heal and grow and and really change. I've I've been blown away by how people, in some cases can change in days, things that they have been stuck with for years or decades. Um. Oh. For me. Um, the question is, how did this experience exceed your expectations and maybe open your eyes to a deeper impact you didn't know you were making? Um, well, he had come to me for one of his kids initially, and, um, his child at the time was not really super interested. And so it was incidental. And, um, you know, he wasn't, um, you know, he was understandably skeptical, uh, and had the standard belief of hypnotist, as you know, uh, cluck like a chicken, etc.. So. So I expected that he might get some benefit. Um. But the ease with which his, um, transformation came and how it came from so deep inside him and a shift in just a set of priorities and how that The decision to shift priorities, shift attention, how that cascaded down. And to me, when I could see someone change at the root like that, where it's not about, say, trying to change their diet, uh, involuntarily, but just realizing this tiny, tiny little thing that that blows my mind every time. Number eight, how deep is your commitment to serving this market? How have you re-engineered your own life to create that impact? What have you sacrificed or given up in the name of that mission? I think the market I think I identify with is, um, identify with serving is these high performers who are, I call them analytical empaths who, uh, as people who have an empathic, artistic, creative side, but who have chosen to compete in, um, whether it's law, medicine, corporate, um. Uh academia, uh, chosen to become celebrities. High pressure positions. And that there's still a human in there. I felt like the people who didn't have an opportunity to come for help to me, you know, not not even not an opportunity who felt like they weren't allowed to because it might cost them their career, might cost them their status. Um, and people who wanted to try something other than medication for um, or getting a diagnosis for what they had going on and where their specific issue was so pinpointed that it could be fixed without being put in a basket and having a label tagged on it. To me, it was important that I, I was willing to sacrifice the traditional security of, um, you know, um, expected doctor ways of practicing so that I can get to the root of how these things work for myself. This was before as much information was available on the internet as is now. And before this, much was known about, uh, the nature of, um, cognition, consciousness and those dynamics. So. Uh, I may I re-injured it in my life so that I could develop an understanding of. Like the way thought works. Yeah. So. And and. The the market that wants that. I think I'm deeply committed to because I think I was once a part of that market and couldn't find it when I needed it. And so I think my life would have out entirely differently had I had, um, access to these ideas and in earlier, more flexible, informative parts of my life. Are we recording? What have you learned from your market? How have they inspired you? I've been inspired by how much people can change, how quickly I've been inspired by folks who I've seen, who have created lives of so much success despite such deep pain or. Loneliness or this existential angst sometimes. And just. How hard people are willing to work to turn around also because in some cases, certain things, the only way to get it done because of their belief structure is to work for it. And they've been willing to do the work that they believe is what it takes to allow themselves the transformation. Section. Last question. And this section is the world would be a better place when. And I say the world would be a better place when more people are aware of how. Much is possible for them. Ya uh, when more people are aware of so many situations where they don't necessarily need a medication or diagnosis, they need, um, a moment to hear themselves think. When people when more people are empowered to express the fullness of their being in all aspects, instead of having themselves honed, uh, for one particular skill for the market, and even having that skill lose meaning as it becomes, um, blunted by them being a cog in the machine. It's absolutely true. It's not. It's not so much an excuse as, um, a misallocation of their attention and time. What is it about you or your method that overcomes that limitation? Um, because I get it. I've spent a chunk of my life waiting to get to the end of my career to give myself permission to. To live, to enjoy, to rest. Um, and with that, I also tied a lot of my value to the identity that went with having accomplished, um, things that were right outside of my reach that, um, I had deprioritized like, I had a couple years left in my psychiatry residency, and I felt that I had to go catch up on computers because to me. Module two, the ever evolving avatar. So about your avatar is perceived or real limitations? What's the biggest excuse your avatar makes for not having achieved a favorable outcome for favorable outcome yet? Um, really not having thought about it? No, I don't think my, um, most of the time my people like I've been meaning to get around to it. And I think now it's time. Uh, they put a lot of time into family, care for family and put themselves with their needs last often. Um, pursue academic, um, or career goals. Um. What else? Just busy. Busy? How might that excuse be justified? Because they've been so busy. How can you validate that excuse? They have been very, very, very busy. These are people who have have made extreme sacrifices of, uh, you know, luxuries of leisure. What is it about your method that overcomes that limitation? Because I've been really busy as well. I, um, well, I went to medical school. Software engineering, uh, software consultancy. That kept me quite busy. Um. Yeah, I think I if I could go back, I'd get, you know, I would say both. I wish I could have gotten more time in software, um, you know, more dedicated and in a different way, because the companies that what I had glamorized in my head was, um, startup life. And it wasn't glamorous. It was, um, it was hardcore. Um, so that was a lesson. Um, so I think the fact that I was, you know, able to jump out of my residency and for a long time do do well until until, you know, the stress of it accumulated. That shows to a certain extent and where I am now that shows that, um, the limitations, a lot of the limitations around how I define myself were able to dissolve, thank goodness. And the feelings I have, I think, for there was a misery that I carried with me for a long time that I assumed was with mine forever. Um, because I was looking for a solution outside of myself and the realization and the ability to actually feel the way I do inside now. To me, that's that's the ultimate win. This is the feeling I was looking for. So it is possible to feel like a fulfillment of groundedness, a feeling that you're actually that I'm actually in my life living it so that it won't be that I didn't get any lifetime at the end of my life. And plus my method relies heavily on structures of, uh, what Erickson Milton Erickson hypno hypnotists used to call, uh, utilization behavior, you know, utilization, utilization behavior something else in neuroscience, but utilization, which meant that whatever a person brings to the table, that they a lot of times see as part of the manifestation of their problem, find a way to see how it can be the very fuel that catalyzes the solution. How do your biggest competitors fall short of in overcoming it? Um, I don't know. It's hard to say. I see, I see a lot of spiritual bypassing. I see a lot of folks, uh, pushing off. Of, um. Uh, you know, um, using techniques that haven't worked for them. And to me, that was the most important thing, that I was only using techniques that I had gotten results for, either for myself or for a significant amount of clients. What is what's a false belief they have about the industry? Uh, a lot of people are missing out because they think it's all woo. There is a lot of woo out there. Um, but there are some of us who are out here practicing in, in search of, um, an empirical sense of oneness, uh, a more integrated self that feels these positive feelings not on the basis of, um, spiritual bypassing or self-delusion or whatever else, but just in terms of finding a path to just grounding and, you know, making peace with the truth that is. that they could accomplish what they have. There's also the belief, um, in people being stuck in their personality or their attitude, or that transformation takes years or lots of therapy, um, or that you have the more, quote, deeply buried a memory is, the harder you have to dig for it. None of these are true. And what is the false belief that, um, they have about themselves and their ability to achieve it? The capacity to achieve it often, um, there's the belief that if they haven't got done it by now, they won't be able to do it because we're older now. And that's absolutely false. That's absolutely false memories. Unconscious memories are just as accessible now as they've always been. It's just a matter of, um. Um, finding yourself in the right space to allow them to emerge in the present and kind of trusting yourself to be able to tolerate them and to experience them as less intimidating than they were then when during the initial wounding, I mean about the best way to solve the problem or achieve the outcome. Come. So what is the false belief they have about, uh, the best way to solve the problem or achieve the outcome? Uh, there's a lot of, um. Uh, taught, uh, belief in, um, like, cognitive behavioral therapy or cognitive restructuring type things. And we're dealing with much more limbic things. These are things that you gotta you gotta dig in there and get in the feelings. Uh, and a lot of them, I gotta say, us believe that since we've been so stoic or so tough for so long that there's no undoing it, there's no room in it for us to, um, learn the skills of managing our emotions and experiencing fulfillment, when really, there's plenty of opportunity. It's not that we have to learn to, um, experience the emotions that we want to find, the perspective that allows us to give ourselves permission to. And so, yeah, there's the belief that the, the discipline and hard way is more of what it needs, when really it's more of a way. It's more allowing passive volition. What might it be a good thing that they've waited until now? Why might it be a good thing that they've waited until now? Because the technology has come along so much more? Um, both, um, the technology that they have access to, to implement and the technology on, on, um, in terms of what we know about the brain, what we know about transformation, um, I think there was a time not too long ago when they would have encountered, if they haven't already, um, a lot of discouragement and a lot of, um, myth about the, um, stuff like brain and behavior can't change because, um, you don't get any new nerve cells, and there's a lot of stuff that some of which may be scientifically true, but the, the leaps of, um, the assumptions we made about what they said about the brain and the ability to change from the science, the jumps we made from the science, um, often were probably a lot more pessimistic than they needed to be. And limiting Five biggest objections you might have around forging ahead with this product. Um, not having enough time. Wondering if it's worth the money. Not thinking it'll stick for them. Uh, not understanding how it could possibly work. Um, not thinking they have time. I already said that. Um, not thinking their minds will allow them to. Or that, you know, happiness is sustainable. The sacred cows with sour milk. What are the sacred cows with sour milk? Um, a lot of the beliefs in discipline and willpower and, um. The belief that, um, a person, if they can't do certain things by a certain stage in life or they're immature, irresponsible, lazy, various other labels that really. Often the labeling and the stigma is a large part of what's keeping them in their self-concept stuck.  
