# Narrative as active inference: an integrative account of cognitive and social functions in adaptation
**Authors:** Nabil Bouizegarene, Maxwell J. D. Ramstead, Axel Constant, Karl J. Friston, Laurence J. Kirmayer
**Source:** Frontiers in Psychology (2022)

## Abstract
While the ubiquity and importance of narratives for human adaptation is widely recognized, there is no integrative framework for understanding the roles of narrative in human adaptation. Research has identified several cognitive and social functions of narratives that are conducive to well-being and adaptation as well as to coordinated social practices and enculturation. In this paper, we characterize the cognitive and social functions of narratives in terms of active inference, to support the claim that one of the main adaptive functions of narrative is to generate more useful (i.e., accurate, parsimonious) predictions for the individual, as well as to coordinate group action (over multiple timescales) through shared predictions about collective behavior. Active inference is a theory that depicts the fundamental tendency of living organisms to adapt by proactively inferring the causes of their sensations (including their own actions). We review narrative research on identity, event segmentation, episodic memory, future projections, storytelling practices, enculturation, and master narratives. We show how this research dovetails with the active inference framework and propose an account of the cognitive and social functions of narrative that emphasizes that narratives are for the future—even when they are focused on recollecting or recounting the past. Understanding narratives as cognitive and cultural tools for mutual prediction in social contexts can guide research on narrative in adaptive behavior and psychopathology, based on a parsimonious mechanistic model of some of the basic adaptive functions of narrative.

## 1 Introduction
The ubiquity and importance of narratives has been recognized by many disciplines (Sarbin, 1986; Turner, 1996; Angus and McLeod, 2004; Boyd, 2010; McAdams and McLean, 2013; Taylor, 2016), but an integrative model of the mechanisms linking narrative to human adaptation is lacking. Narratives are reports of real or imagined events, which can be presented in language (verbally or textually) or through sequences of images or other symbols. The narrativity of these reports lies not just in their content, which may point directly to specific events, but also in their structure: that is, the ways in which the linguistic or other symbols convey a set of relationships among events, especially temporal relations (Bal, 2017). In addition, narrative has both social-interactional and cognitive-representational functions (McAdams, 2006; Hutto, 2007; Hutto, 2017); however, the extant literature tends to focus only on one of these two related aspects.

This paper proposes a model of the adaptive mechanisms at play in the production and use of narratives that can account for key aspects of both their cognitive and social functions. We are concerned with the structure of narrative rather than with their content, and as such focus on the implications of the ability to produce narratives rather than what is told through them (Adler et al., 2016). Hence, our account is relevant to understanding structural features of narratives, such as coherence (McAdams, 2006; Adler et al., 2016) and their socio-cultural status as master narratives (McLean and Syed, 2015), rather than with the impact of specific narrative themes (Adler et al., 2016) or fine-grained analysis of modes of narrativity through which experience is given story-form (Abbott, 2014; Bal, 2017).

To motivate our model, we re-examine work approaching narratives from complementary perspectives: as cognitive schemas in personality and developmental psychology (Nelson and Fivush, 2004; Singer, 2004); as cultural tools in social psychology (i.e., master narratives; McLean and Syed, 2015), and as storytelling practices in anthropology and philosophy (e.g., Hutto, 2017). We argue that many of the functions associated with structural aspects of narrative can be understood in terms of the principles of active inference (see Table 1 for a summary of the main claims). This perspective shows the complementarity of cognitive and social functions and points the way to novel directions for research.

## 2 Active inference
Active inference emerged from predictive processing, an umbrella term referring to several related approaches to modeling brain function (e.g., Rao and Ballard, 1999; Clark, 2015). The basic assumption in these approaches is that the brain uses predictive coding algorithms to process sensory information more efficiently. These algorithms are more efficient because they limit information processing to predictions and prediction-errors. Instead of analyzing the entirety of sensory data from the bottom up, the brain uses its best model of the world to predict what the sensations in a forthcoming event will be, and only processes signals that track divergences between expected and actual sensory data. Such models are called ‘generative models’ because they are models of what ‘generates’ the observable sensations from unobservable causes (which are variously called states of affairs in the world, hidden states, latent states, etc.)

The strategy of prediction error minimization can lead to a major economy in information processing because sensations that were accurately predicted need not be further processed. In addition, the prediction errors are used to constantly improve the generative model in an iterative process. Of course, the perfect model can never be obtained, both because we live in dynamic, ever-changing environments and because we never have complete access to our environment through our senses. Thus, the current best model is not the “true” representation of the environment, but the one that yields the least prediction error relative to one’s adaptive goals or necessities.

According to active inference, perception, learning and action selection are the “internal” solutions an agent has for keeping track of and modeling an ever-changing world. Active inference can be viewed as an extension of the predictive coding framework to account for action, using the same processes as those pertaining to perception under predictive processing (Parr et al., 2022). To extend this logic to action, it is posited that predictions are made about body position and an action is a process of matching bodily state to prediction, in a self-fulfilling prophecy of sorts. By incorporating action as a prediction-error minimization process, active inference addresses the problem of evolutionary adaptation to ever-changing environments. On the sensory side of the loop, action is cast as the process whereby the agent proactively and selectively samples sensory data that conform to its expectations about the kinds of outcomes and events that it should encounter, and on the motor side of the loop, the production of movements conform to its expectations serves to further minimize prediction error.

More formally, action, or the selection of one among competing plans or courses of action (which are called policies in the active inference literature) is based upon a generative model of the consequences of action (e.g., ‘What will my action lead me to see if I look over there?’). Active inference provides a formalism for the tautology that active agents, like humans, usually select courses of action that lead them to outcomes that they prefer. Perception and learning correspond, respectively, to making inferences about what is causing an agent’s sensory data, and about the parameters of their probabilistic representations of the world. Agents are modelled as acting by selecting courses of action that get them closer to outcomes which they expect, and which are characteristic of “the kind of agent or person that they are.” These two sets of basic processes are important for our account of narrativity: (i) perception and learning, which refers to the error minimizing updates of expectations about states and outcomes of the world, and (ii) action or policy selection, which refer to the proactive sampling of sensory entries that confirm our expectations about “what will happen next.”

## 3.1.2 Event narratives as active inference
We can appeal to active inference to explain the efficacy of narratives of specific past and future events. As noted above, a recent perspective on memory and future projection argues that the adaptive function of future projections is increased by the incorporation of information provided by memories of specific past events. This constructive episodic simulation hypothesis suggests that the basic adaptive function of episodic memories is to guide, inform, structure, and constrain the representation of future events (Schacter and Addis, 2007, 2020). The idea that reliance on past event narratives can increase the accuracy of predictions and the adaptive value of future projections has received much empirical support (e.g., Suddendorf and Corballis, 1997; Wheeler et al., 1997; Atance and O'Neill, 2001; Klein et al., 2002; De Brigard, 2014; Conway et al., 2016). Narratives are crucial for this process in that they organize past and future experience into units, connect them in sequences, and tag them in ways that make them accessible in situations in which similar cues or sequences of events occur.

Under active inference, a function of specific past event narratives can be understood as providing a pool of information made of past specific episodes, within which regularities can be extracted and leveraged to predict situations which are similar in certain respects to relevant remembered episodes, thereby avoiding the cognitive burden of excessive updating of one’s probabilistic expectations (Schank, 1980, 1990). Agents can draw from a pool of available possibilities that constitute the legacy of personal experience as well as the vicarious experience inherited from others that is encoded in shared cultural narratives. As noted above, individuals who have difficulty recounting rich narratives of their lives using detailed accounts of specific events tend to have difficulties in adaptive functioning (e.g., Williams et al., 1996). Furthermore, because the future is never simply a repetition of the past, multiple past events usually need to be combined to generate accurate inferences about a specific upcoming event (Schacter and Addis, 2007). Even repeated events that have a similar structure over time (e.g., holidays at the grandparents, weekly basketball practice) may have a substantial degree of novelty that can be addressed by incorporating information from other episodic memories or schemas (Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000).

A recent line of research on memory provides evidence consistent with this proposal. Congleton and Berntsen (2020, 2022) have shown that experiencing surprising stimuli tends to increase memory for the event that preceded the surprise. In other words, the novelty of the situation increases the salience of recent events. This functional increase of memory for the context of surprising information was found in one recent study to involve hippocampal activity, which may be an important contributor to updating memory in the case of prediction error (Sinclair et al., 2021).

Taken together, these results are consistent with, and provide at least indirect evidence for, our contention that narratives partly function to implement active inference. Specifically, we propose that narratives of specific past events function as a pool of information aimed at guiding the generation of effective predictions. Well-predicted events (i.e., routines) quickly become forgotten (Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000) because they do not contribute relevant information for predictions (Philippe, 2022). When prediction-errors arise, they lead to the encoding of new memories, because they carry highly relevant information to improve the accuracy of predictions in the future. The formation of new memories, which necessarily involves narratives (Rubin, 2006), can be understood as a process of model updating. Active inference at the level of event narratives involves a conservative process of replicating elements of past events into future events that are closely similar to those past events (e.g., habits) which maintains coherence and continuity between past and future, and a creative or constructive process that involves the flexible recombination of past events into future events (Schacter and Addis, 2007). Narratives are particularly useful for active inference because they can contribute to both the conservative processes that maintain old memories and use them as models for new events, as well as generating new models through their recombination or projection to produce new stories (Mar and Oatley, 2008).

In summary, event narratives are ideally suited for predictive processing because of their ability to represent past and future events in segmented event sequences, to provide structured information about the past (episodic memories) that can help predict future events, and to project these inferences in the form of cohesive imagined scenarios of future events (future projections). This occurs, first, through an expectation-confirming conservative process, a strategy for prediction that involves a replication of the aspects of future events that should be identical or similar enough to the past, and second, through an expectation-updating, constructive process that involves recombining elements of multiple past events (Schacter and Addis, 2007) or reinterpreting memories in counterfactual thinking to update and create new expectations for the future (De Brigard and Parikh, 2019). In the active inference approach, these two distinct functions of narrative are integrated into a single predictive mechanism that aims to find the optimal balance between conservation and change, which is necessary to adapt to an environment that evinces both continuity and change. This balance instantiates aspects of Piaget’s broader notions of cognitive assimilation and accommodation (Piaget, 1976; Block, 1982; Hanfstingl et al., 2022) and provides a way to understand the coordination of these complementary and interdependent processes.

## Conclusion
We have proposed a framework for understanding some of the key functions of narratives, leveraging the active inference framework to clarify the cognitive and social utility of personal and event narratives. The contributions of our model to the literature include (1) an integration of the cognitive and social functions of narrative, (2) a shift towards understanding narrative as basically for predicting the future, and (3) the potential to adapt a widely used computational toolkit for modelling narrative functions. Despite its wide explanatory reach, this model is not meant to be an all-encompassing account of narrativity and the many roles narrative plays in human cognition and social interaction. In the course of human cultural coevolution, our narrative capacities have been put to many novel uses, each of which has its own scope and limits. In particular, our active inference model of narrativity does not aim to explain completely why narratives are so central to art and entertainment. The function of literary or cinematic fiction may be to help us get better at simulating human experience by widening and enriching the repertoire of models that are available to us to predict the future (Mar and Oatley, 2008). The key role of affect and emotion in these activities may reflect their role in organizing and justifying behavior in social interactions (Oatley, 1996, 1999). However, many of the aesthetic features that contribute to the appeal of narratives may be independent from their power to predict real world events. Our model also does not aim to explain why some individuals with psychological or neurological disorders may have difficulty using narrative to accurately predict their futures—though it provides a framework that could be used to develop a typology of narrative pathologies.

The current account integrates the basic functions of narrative as a representational and communicational process, through an active inference lens. Narratives segment the beginning and end of specific events, enabling the capacity to build and maintain an information pool of specific past events to inform expectations, and to structure the imagination of the future in the enriched format of episodic future projection. The meaning-making function of narrative is especially useful for the exploratory phase of active inference, in that it allows us to draw new links between various facets of our experiences to incorporate changes in representations (i.e., model updating) and assimilate unexpected information (when needed). The coherence function of narrative is used to maintain and replicate the integrity of our complex network of expectations to minimize internal contradictions, as well as providing expectations linked to culturally common situations and typical life trajectories. Narrative storytelling practices can be usefully understood via active inference, in so far as they function by providing agents with immersive regimes of attention and deontic cues that prompt human beings to react in culturally prescribed ways to engage with their niche. Finally, an active inference lens clarifies the defining characteristics of master narratives, while suggesting the reasons why some individuals go through the ordeal of adopting alternative narratives that challenge the conventional story.

In sum, the importance and ubiquity of narratives in many domains of human adaptation and sociality can be parsimoniously explained by recognizing their role in human social life, via active inference. Cast as active inference, narratives are an evolved capacity that promote human adaptation for individuals and groups (McAdams, 2019). From the point of view of active inference, it becomes clear that narrative capacity is not only a medium for human cognition and sociality but through its basic structure contributes to the adaptability of individuals and communities. Active inference provides new tools for modelling the narrative dynamics that link cognition and social interaction.